
12 


PROLOGUE 


3 

Of  the  Ordering  of  the  Shire 

The  NOUN  was  VERB  into  four  quarters,  the  Farthings 
ADVERB  referred  to,  North,  South,  East,  and  West;  and  these 
again  each  into  a  number  of  folklands,  which  still  bore  the 
names  of  some  of  the  ADJECTIVE  leading  families,  although  by  the 
time  of  this  history  these  names  were  no  longer  found  only 
in  their  proper  folklands.  Nearly  all  Tooks  still  lived  in  the 
Tookland,  but  that  was  not  true  of  many  other  families,  such 
as  the  Bagginses  or  the  Boffins.  Outside  the  Farthings  were 
the  East  and  West  Marches:  the  Buckland  (p.  129);  and  the 
Westmarch  added  to  the  Shire  in  S.R.  1452. 

The  Shire  at  this  time  had  hardly  any  ‘government’. 
Families  for  the  most  part  managed  their  own  affairs.  Grow¬ 
ing  food  and  eating  it  occupied  most  of  their  time.  In 
other  matters  they  were,  as  a  rule,  generous  and  not  greedy, 
but  contented  and  moderate,  so  that  estates,  farms,  work¬ 
shops,  and  small  trades  tended  to  remain  unchanged  for 
generations. 

There  remained,  of  course,  the  ancient  tradition  concern¬ 
ing  the  high  king  at  Fornost,  or  Norbury  as  they  called  it, 
away  north  of  the  Shire.  But  there  had  been  no  king  for  nearly 
a  thousand  years,  and  even  the  ruins  of  Kings’  Norbury  were 
covered  with  grass.  Yet  the  Hobbits  still  said  of  wild  folk  and 
wicked  things  (such  as  trolls)  that  they  had  not  heard  of  the 
king.  For  they  attributed  to  the  king  of  old  all  their  essential 
laws;  and  usually  they  kept  the  laws  of  free  will,  because  they 
were  The  Rules  (as  they  said),  both  ancient  and  just. 

It  is  true  that  the  Took  family  had  long  been  pre-eminent; 
for  the  office  of  Thain  had  passed  to  them  (from  the  Old- 
bucks)  some  centuries  before,  and  the  chief  Took  had  borne 
that  title  ever  since.  The  Thain  was  the  master  of  the  Shire- 
moot,  and  captain  of  the  Shire-muster  and  the  Hobbitry-in- 
arms;  but  as  muster  and  moot  were  only  held  in  times  of 
emergency,  which  no  longer  occurred,  the  Thainship  had 
ceased  to  be  more  than  a  nominal  dignity.  The  Took  family 


PROLOGUE 


13 


was  still,  indeed,  accorded  a  special  respect,  for  it  remained 
both  numerous  and  exceedingly  wealthy,  and  was  liable  to 
produce  in  every  generation  strong  characters  of  peculiar 
habits  and  even  adventurous  temperament.  The  latter  quali¬ 
ties,  however,  were  now  rather  tolerated  (in  the  rich)  than 
generally  approved.  The  custom  endured,  nonetheless,  of 
referring  to  the  head  of  the  family  as  The  Took,  and  of 
adding  to  his  name,  if  required,  a  number:  such  as  Isengrim 
the  Second,  for  instance. 

The  only  real  official  in  the  Shire  at  this  date  was  the  Mayor 
of  Michel  Delving  (or  of  the  Shire),  who  was  elected  every 
seven  years  at  the  Free  Fair  on  the  White  Downs  at  the  Lithe, 
that  is  at  Midsummer.  As  mayor  almost  his  only  duty  was 
to  preside  at  banquets,  given  on  the  Shire-holidays,  which 
occurred  at  frequent  intervals.  But  the  offices  of  Postmaster 
and  First  Shirriff  were  attached  to  the  mayoralty,  so  that  he 
managed  both  the  Messenger  Service  and  the  Watch.  These 
were  the  only  Shire-services,  and  the  Messengers  were  the 
most  numerous,  and  much  the  busier  of  the  two.  By  no 
means  all  Hobbits  were  lettered,  but  those  who  were  wrote 
constantly  to  all  their  friends  (and  a  selection  of  their 
relations)  who  lived  further  off  than  an  afternoon’s  walk. 

The  Shirriffs  was  the  name  that  the  Hobbits  gave  to  their 
police,  or  the  nearest  equivalent  that  they  possessed.  They 
had,  of  course,  no  uniforms  (such  things  being  quite  un¬ 
known),  only  a  feather  in  their  caps;  and  they  were  in  practice 
rather  haywards  than  policemen,  more  concerned  with  the 
strayings  of  beasts  than  of  people.  There  were  in  all  the  Shire 
only  twelve  of  them,  three  in  each  Farthing,  for  Inside  Work. 
A  rather  larger  body,  varying  at  need,  was  employed  to  ‘beat 
the  bounds’,  and  to  see  that  Outsiders  of  any  land,  great  or 
small,  did  not  make  themselves  a  nuisance. 

At  the  time  when  this  story  begins  the  Bounders,  as  they 
were  called,  had  been  greatly  increased.  There  were  many 
reports  and  complaints  of  strange  persons  and  creatures 
prowling  about  the  borders,  or  over  them:  the  first  sign  that 
all  was  not  quite  as  it  should  be,  and  always  had  been  except 


14 


PROLOGUE 


in  tales  and  legends  of  long  ago.  Few  heeded  the  sign,  and 
not  even  Bilbo  yet  had  any  notion  of  what  it  portended.  Sixty 
years  had  passed  since  he  set  out  on  his  memorable  journey, 
and  he  was  old  even  for  Hobbits,  who  reached  a  hundred 
as  often  as  not;  but  much  evidently  still  remained  of  the 
considerable  wealth  that  he  had  brought  back.  How  much  or 
how  little  he  revealed  to  no  one,  not  even  to  Frodo  his  favour¬ 
ite  ‘nephew’.  And  he  still  kept  secret  the  ring  that  he  had 
found. 


4 

Of  the  Finding  of  the  Ring 

As  is  told  in  The  Hobbit,  there  came  one  day  to  Bilbo’s  door  the 
great  Wizard,  Gandalf  the  Grey,  and  thirteen  dwarves  with 
him:  none  other,  indeed,  than  Thorin  Oakenshield,  descend¬ 
ant  of  kings,  and  his  twelve  companions  in  exile.  With  them 
he  set  out,  to  his  own  lasting  astonishment,  on  a  morning  of 
April,  it  being  then  the  year  1341  Shire -reckoning,  on  a  quest 
of  great  treasure,  the  dwarf-hoards  of  the  Kings  under  the 
Mountain,  beneath  Erebor  in  Dale,  far  off  in  the  East.  The 
quest  was  successful,  and  the  Dragon  that  guarded  the  hoard 
was  destroyed.  Yet,  though  before  all  was  won  the  Battle  of 
Five  Armies  was  fought,  and  Thorin  was  slain,  and  many 
deeds  of  renown  were  done,  the  matter  would  scarcely  have 
concerned  later  history,  or  earned  more  than  a  note  in 
the  long  annals  of  the  Third  Age,  but  for  an  ‘accident’  by  the 
way.  The  party  was  assailed  by  Ores  in  a  high  pass  of  the 
Misty  Mountains  as  they  went  towards  Wilderland;  and  so  it 
happened  that  Bilbo  was  lost  for  a  while  in  the  black  ore- 
mines  deep  under  the  mountains,  and  there,  as  he  groped  in 
vain  in  the  dark,  he  put  his  hand  on  a  ring,  lying  on  the  floor 
of  a  tunnel.  He  put  it  in  his  pocket.  It  seemed  then  like  mere 
luck. 

Trying  to  find  his  way  out,  Bilbo  went  on  down  to  the 
roots  of  the  mountains,  until  he  could  go  no  further.  At  the 


PROLOGUE 


15 


bottom  of  the  tunnel  lay  a  cold  lake  far  from  the  light,  and 
on  an  island  of  rock  in  the  water  lived  Gollum.  He  was  a 
loathsome  little  creature:  he  paddled  a  small  boat  with  his 
large  flat  feet,  peering  with  pale  luminous  eyes  and  catching 
blind  fish  with  his  long  fingers,  and  eating  them  raw.  He  ate 
any  living  thing,  even  ore,  if  he  could  catch  it  and  strangle  it 
without  a  struggle.  He  possessed  a  secret  treasure  that  had 
come  to  him  long  ages  ago,  when  he  still  lived  in  the  light:  a 
ring  of  gold  that  made  its  wearer  invisible.  It  was  the  one 
thing  he  loved,  his  ‘Precious’,  and  he  talked  to  it,  even  when 
it  was  not  with  him.  For  he  kept  it  hidden  safe  in  a  hole  on 
his  island,  except  when  he  was  hunting  or  spying  on  the  ores 
of  the  mines. 

Maybe  he  would  have  attacked  Bilbo  at  once,  if  the  ring 
had  been  on  him  when  they  met;  but  it  was  not,  and  the 
hobbit  held  in  his  hand  an  Elvish  knife,  which  served  him  as 
a  sword.  So  to  gain  time  Gollum  challenged  Bilbo  to  the 
Riddle -game,  saying  that  if  he  asked  a  riddle  which  Bilbo 
could  not  guess,  then  he  would  kill  him  and  eat  him;  but  if 
Bilbo  defeated  him,  then  he  would  do  as  Bilbo  wished:  he 
would  lead  him  to  a  way  out  of  the  tunnels. 

Since  he  was  lost  in  the  dark  without  hope,  and  could 
neither  go  on  nor  back,  Bilbo  accepted  the  challenge;  and 
they  asked  one  another  many  riddles.  In  the  end  Bilbo  won 
the  game,  more  by  luck  (as  it  seemed)  than  by  wits;  for  he 
was  stumped  at  last  for  a  riddle  to  ask,  and  cried  out,  as  his 
hand  came  upon  the  ring  he  had  picked  up  and  forgotten: 
What  have  I  got  in  my  pocket?  This  Gollum  failed  to  answer, 
though  he  demanded  three  guesses. 

The  Authorities,  it  is  true,  differ  whether  this  last  question 
was  a  mere  ‘question’  and  not  a  ‘riddle’  according  to  the  strict 
rules  of  the  Game;  but  all  agree  that,  after  accepting  it  and 
trying  to  guess  the  answer,  Gollum  was  bound  by  his 
promise.  And  Bilbo  pressed  him  to  keep  his  word;  for  the 
thought  came  to  him  that  this  slimy  creature  might  prove 
false,  even  though  such  promises  were  held  sacred,  and  of 
old  all  but  the  wickedest  things  feared  to  break  them.  But 


i6 


PROLOGUE 


after  ages  alone  in  the  dark  Gollum’s  heart  was  black,  and 
treachery  was  in  it.  He  slipped  away,  and  returned  to  his 
island,  of  which  Bilbo  knew  nothing,  not  far  off  in  the  dark 
water.  There,  he  thought,  lay  his  ring.  He  was  hungry  now, 
and  angry,  and  once  his  ‘Precious’  was  with  him  he  would 
not  fear  any  weapon  at  all. 

But  the  ring  was  not  on  the  island;  he  had  lost  it,  it  was 
gone.  His  screech  sent  a  shiver  down  Bilbo’s  back,  though  he 
did  not  yet  understand  what  had  happened.  But  Gollum  had 
at  last  leaped  to  a  guess,  too  late.  What  has  it  got  in  its 
pocketses?  he  cried.  The  light  in  his  eyes  was  like  a  green 
flame  as  he  sped  back  to  murder  the  hobbit  and  recover  his 
‘Precious’.  Just  in  time  Bilbo  saw  his  peril,  and  he  fled  blindly 
up  the  passage  away  from  the  water;  and  once  more  he  was 
saved  by  his  luck.  For  as  he  ran  he  put  his  hand  in  his  pocket, 
and  the  ring  slipped  quietly  on  to  his  finger.  So  it  was  that 
Gollum  passed  him  without  seeing  him,  and  went  to  guard 
the  way  out,  lest  the  ‘thief’  should  escape.  Warily  Bilbo  fol¬ 
lowed  him,  as  he  went  along,  cursing,  and  talking  to  himself 
about  his  ‘Precious’;  from  which  talk  at  last  even  Bilbo 
guessed  the  truth,  and  hope  came  to  him  in  the  darkness:  he 
himself  had  found  the  marvellous  ring  and  a  chance  of  escape 
from  the  ores  and  from  Gollum. 

At  length  they  came  to  a  halt  before  an  unseen  opening 
that  led  to  the  lower  gates  of  the  mines,  on  the  eastward  side 
of  the  mountains.  There  Gollum  crouched  at  bay,  smelling 
and  listening;  and  Bilbo  was  tempted  to  slay  him  with  his 
sword.  But  pity  stayed  him,  and  though  he  kept  the  ring,  in 
which  his  only  hope  lay,  he  would  not  use  it  to  help  him  kill 
the  wretched  creature  at  a  disadvantage.  In  the  end,  gathering 
his  courage,  he  leaped  over  Gollum  in  the  dark,  and  fled 
away  down  the  passage,  pursued  by  his  enemy’s  cries  of  hate 
and  despair:  Thief,  thief!  Baggins!  We  hates  it  for  ever! 

Now  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  this  is  not  the  story  as  Bilbo 
first  told  it  to  his  companions.  To  them  his  account  was  that 
Gollum  had  promised  to  give  him  a  present ,  if  he  won  the 


PROLOGUE 


17 


game;  but  when  Gollum  went  to  fetch  it  from  his  island  he 
found  the  treasure  was  gone:  a  magic  ring,  which  had  been 
given  to  him  long  ago  on  his  birthday.  Bilbo  guessed  that  this 
was  the  very  ring  that  he  had  found,  and  as  he  had  won  the 
game,  it  was  already  his  by  right.  But  being  in  a  tight  place, 
he  said  nothing  about  it,  and  made  Gollum  show  him  the 
way  out,  as  a  reward  instead  of  a  present.  This  account  Bilbo 
set  down  in  his  memoirs,  and  he  seems  never  to  have  altered 
it  himself,  not  even  after  the  Council  of  Elrond.  Evidently  it 
still  appeared  in  the  original  Red  Book,  as  it  did  in  several  of 
the  copies  and  abstracts.  But  many  copies  contain  the  true 
account  (as  an  alternative),  derived  no  doubt  from  notes  by 
Frodo  or  Samwise,  both  of  whom  learned  the  truth,  though 
they  seem  to  have  been  unwilling  to  delete  anything  actually 
written  by  the  old  hobbit  himself. 

Gandalf,  however,  disbelieved  Bilbo’s  first  story,  as  soon 
as  he  heard  it,  and  he  continued  to  be  very  curious  about  the 
ring.  Eventually  he  got  the  true  tale  out  of  Bilbo  after  much 
questioning,  which  for  a  while  strained  their  friendship;  but 
the  wizard  seemed  to  think  the  truth  important.  Though  he 
did  not  say  so  to  Bilbo,  he  also  thought  it  important,  and 
disturbing,  to  find  that  the  good  hobbit  had  not  told  the 
truth  from  the  first:  quite  contrary  to  his  habit.  The  idea  of  a 
‘present’  was  not  mere  hobbitlike  invention,  all  the  same.  It 
was  suggested  to  Bilbo,  as  he  confessed,  by  Gollum’s  talk 
that  he  overheard;  for  Gollum  did,  in  fact,  call  the  ring  his 
‘birthday-present’,  many  times.  That  also  Gandalf  thought 
strange  and  suspicious;  but  he  did  not  discover  the  truth 
in  this  point  for  many  more  years,  as  will  be  seen  in  this 
book. 

Of  Bilbo’s  later  adventures  little  more  need  be  said  here. 
With  the  help  of  the  ring  he  escaped  from  the  ore-guards  at 
the  gate  and  rejoined  his  companions.  He  used  the  ring  many 
times  on  his  quest,  chiefly  for  the  help  of  his  friends;  but  he 
kept  it  secret  from  them  as  long  as  he  could.  After  his  return 
to  his  home  he  never  spoke  of  it  again  to  anyone,  save  Gandalf 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 


and  Frodo;  and  no  one  else  in  the  Shire  knew  of  its  existence, 
or  so  he  believed.  Only  to  Frodo  did  he  show  the  account  of 
his  Journey  that  he  was  writing. 

His  sword,  Sting,  Bilbo  hung  over  his  fireplace,  and  his 
coat  of  marvellous  mail,  the  gift  of  the  Dwarves  from  the 
Dragon-hoard,  he  lent  to  a  museum,  to  the  Michel  Delving 
Mathom-house  in  fact.  But  he  kept  in  a  drawer  at  Bag  End 
the  old  cloak  and  hood  that  he  had  worn  on  his  travels; 
and  the  ring,  secured  by  a  fine  chain,  remained  in  his 
pocket. 

He  returned  to  his  home  at  Bag  End  on  June  the  22nd  in 
his  fifty-second  year  (S.R.  1342),  and  nothing  very  notable 
occurred  in  the  Shire  until  Mr.  Baggins  began  the  prep¬ 
arations  for  the  celebration  of  his  hundred-and-eleventh 
birthday  (S.R.  1401).  At  this  point  this  History  begins. 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 

At  the  end  of  the  Third  Age  the  part  played  by  the  Hobbits 
in  the  great  events  that  led  to  the  inclusion  of  the  Shire  in  the 
Reunited  Kingdom  awakened  among  them  a  more  wide¬ 
spread  interest  in  their  own  history;  and  many  of  their  tra¬ 
ditions,  up  to  that  time  still  mainly  oral,  were  collected  and 
written  down.  The  greater  families  were  also  concerned  with 
events  in  the  Kingdom  at  large,  and  many  of  their  members 
studied  its  ancient  histories  and  legends.  By  the  end  of  the 
first  century  of  the  Fourth  Age  there  were  already  to  be  found 
in  the  Shire  several  libraries  that  contained  many  historical 
books  and  records. 

The  largest  of  these  collections  were  probably  at  Under¬ 
towers,  at  Great  Smials,  and  at  Brandy  Hall.  This  account  of 
the  end  of  the  Third  Age  is  drawn  mainly  from  the  Red  Book 
of  Westmarch.  That  most  important  source  for  the  history 
of  the  War  of  the  Ring  was  so  called  because  it  was  long 
preserved  at  Undertowers,  the  home  of  the  Fairbairns, 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 


19 


Wardens  of  the  Westmarch.*  It  was  in  origin  Bilbo’s  private 
diary,  which  he  took  with  him  to  Rivendell.  Frodo  brought  it 
back  to  the  Shire,  together  with  many  loose  leaves  of  notes, 
and  during  S.R.  1420-1  he  nearly  filled  its  pages  with  his 
account  of  the  War.  But  annexed  to  it  and  preserved  with  it, 
probably  in  a  single  red  case,  were  the  three  large  volumes, 
bound  in  red  leather,  that  Bilbo  gave  to  him  as  a  parting  gift. 
To  these  four  volumes  there  was  added  in  Westmarch  a 
fifth  containing  commentaries,  genealogies,  and  various  other 
matter  concerning  the  hobbit  members  of  the  Fellowship. 

The  original  Red  Book  has  not  been  preserved,  but  many 
copies  were  made,  especially  of  the  first  volume,  for  the  use 
of  the  descendants  of  the  children  of  Master  Samwise.  The 
most  important  copy,  however,  has  a  different  history.  It  was 
kept  at  Great  Smials,  but  it  was  written  in  Gondor,  probably 
at  the  request  of  the  great-grandson  of  Peregrin,  and  com¬ 
pleted  in  S.R.  1592  (F.A.  172).  Its  southern  scribe  appended 
this  note:  Findegil,  King’s  Writer,  finished  this  work  in  IV 
172.  It  is  an  exact  copy  in  all  details  of  the  Thain’s  Book  in 
Minas  Tirith.  That  book  was  a  copy,  made  at  the  request  of 
King  Elessar,  of  the  Red  Book  of  the  Periannath,  and  was 
brought  to  him  by  the  Thain  Peregrin  when  he  retired  to 
Gondor  in  IV  64. 

The  Thain’s  Book  was  thus  the  first  copy  made  of  the  Red 
Book  and  contained  much  that  was  later  omitted  or  lost.  In 
Minas  Tirith  it  received  much  annotation,  and  many  correc¬ 
tions,  especially  of  names,  words,  and  quotations  in  the  Elvish 
languages;  and  there  was  added  to  it  an  abbreviated  version 
of  those  parts  of  The  Tale  of  Aragorn  and  Arwen  which  lie 
outside  the  account  of  the  War.  The  full  tale  is  stated  to  have 
been  written  by  Barahir,  grandson  of  the  Steward  Faramir, 
some  time  after  the  passing  of  the  King.  But  the  chief  impor¬ 
tance  of  Findegil’s  copy  is  that  it  alone  contains  the  whole  of 
Bilbo’s  ‘Translations  from  the  Elvish’.  These  three  volumes 

*  See  Appendix  B:  annals  1451,  1462,  1482;  and  note  at  end  of 
Appendix  C. 


20 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 


were  found  to  be  a  work  of  great  skill  and  learning  in  which, 
between  1403  and  1418,  he  had  used  all  the  sources  available 
to  him  in  Rivendell,  both  living  and  written.  But  since  they 
were  little  used  by  Frodo,  being  almost  entirely  concerned 
with  the  Elder  Days,  no  more  is  said  of  them  here. 

Since  Meriadoc  and  Peregrin  became  the  heads  of  their 
great  families,  and  at  the  same  time  kept  up  their  connexions 
with  Rohan  and  Gondor,  the  libraries  at  Bucklebury  and 
Tuckborough  contained  much  that  did  not  appear  in  the  Red 
Book.  In  Brandy  Hall  there  were  many  works  dealing  with 
Eriador  and  the  history  of  Rohan.  Some  of  these  were 
composed  or  begun  by  Meriadoc  himself,  though  in  the  Shire 
he  was  chiefly  remembered  for  his  Herblore  of  the  Shire ,  and 
for  his  Reckoning  of  Years  in  which  he  discussed  the  relation 
of  the  calendars  of  the  Shire  and  Bree  to  those  of  Rivendell, 
Gondor,  and  Rohan.  He  also  wrote  a  short  treatise  on  Old 
Words  and  Names  in  the  Shire ,  showing  special  interest  in 
discovering  the  kinship  with  the  language  of  the  Rohirrim 
of  such  ‘shire-words’  as  mathom  and  old  elements  in  place 
names. 

At  Great  Smials  the  books  were  of  less  interest  to  Shire- 
folk,  though  more  important  for  larger  history.  None  of  them 
was  written  by  Peregrin,  but  he  and  his  successors  collected 
many  manuscripts  written  by  scribes  of  Gondor:  mainly 
copies  or  summaries  of  histories  or  legends  relating  to  Elendil 
and  his  heirs.  Only  here  in  the  Shire  were  to  be  found  exten¬ 
sive  materials  for  the  history  of  Numenor  and  the  arising  of 
Sauron.  It  was  probably  at  Great  Smials  that  The  Tale  of 
Years*  was  put  together,  with  the  assistance  of  material 
collected  by  Meriadoc.  Though  the  dates  given  are  often 
conjectural,  especially  for  the  Second  Age,  they  deserve  atten¬ 
tion.  It  is  probable  that  Meriadoc  obtained  assistance  and 
information  from  Rivendell,  which  he  visited  more  than  once. 
There,  though  Elrond  had  departed,  his  sons  long  remained, 

*  Represented  in  much  reduced  form  in  Appendix  B  as  far  as  the 
end  of  the  Third  Age. 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 


21 


together  with  some  of  the  High-elven  folk.  It  is  said  that 
Celeborn  went  to  dwell  there  after  the  departure  of  Galadriel; 
but  there  is  no  record  of  the  day  when  at  last  he  sought  the 
Grey  Havens,  and  with  him  went  the  last  living  memory  of 
the  Elder  Days  in  Middle-earth. 

